Hi and welcome back.
I want to point out another pitfall of using default values and function parameters and in particular
when we're looking at mutable values.
So this is something that's pretty easy to fall into.
And let me show you what I mean.
Let's start by saying that we want to create a function that's going to add grocery items to a list
and we'll provide the list to the function.
So that's a mutable type.
And then will provide information like the name of the item the quantity and the units that say of the
items.
So let's go ahead and write that kind of function let's call it an item.
And we're going to provided a name.
We're going to provided a quantity and we're going to provided the unit and we're also going to provide
it the grocery list.
And what we'll do is that will append essentially a uniform way the item to the grocery list.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So we'll say grocery list a append and we're just going to format this nicely.
So we'll take the name then we'll put it in maybe the number of units
or the quantity and then the units that format it that way.
So then we'll have format name quantity get it.
So this will append that to the grocery list.
Now technically we don't have to return the grocery list because it is a mutable type it's being passed
in to the function and therefore we don't need to return it.
In fact that's a better approach if you're going to mutate something that's getting passed into a function
a better approach is not to return it this way the user when they use the function knows that something's
going on if they're not getting the list back then they're going to realize they're going to have to
realize that grocery list is being mutated.
So that's a better approach than doing this.
However I want to do this I have to do this because I want to point out a flaw in this kind of approach.
Not not this particular approach but we'll make a slight modification to this in a minute and see how
we get a problem.
OK.
So we have this function.
So let's say that I have two stores that I need to visit so I'm going to want to create two grocery
lists that score it's stole one and still two.
OK.
So now we've got these two grocery lists and I'm going to start adding items to my grocery list so I'm
going to say and item and let's say we want to buy some bananas.
We want to buy two bananas and these are just going to be units.
Let's say two units of bananas and we're going to add that in store one
then we're going to add another item.
Let's say we want to buy some milk.
We want to buy one the leader of milk let's say and we'll go ahead and buy that install one as well.
OK.
So we now have our grocery list.
Let's go ahead and print store one.
And you can see we have our banana and milk.
OK.
Good enough.
Now let's go ahead and start adding items to the second story.
So let's say and item and we're going to add let's say Python right.
We're going to buy a python.
We're going to buy one python.
And what kind of unit.
Well we wanted medium rare so high school headed by a python.
And let's just add one item to that list and sorry we're missing the store that we want to add it to.
So we want to add it to the list for store number two.
So now if we print store number two we see that we have one medium rare Python in that grocery list.
OK.
So that's working out pretty good.
But you notice what I had to do here.
I had to first create my empty list and then pass that into the function.
So let's go ahead and change this function and make it a little easier for all users.
You know I we figure we want to make their life easier.
So let's go ahead.
I'm just going to take the same functions so copy paste and here.
Well I'm going to do that.
If they don't provide us an existing grocery list I'm going to create a new one.
Right.
So instead of appending to the grocery list I'm going to create a new one and then append to it.
So I'm going to do here is just start an empty list keep the list not a dictionary or a set.
OK.
So now we have this growth.
This empty grocery list.
So let's go ahead and run our examples again.
So I'm going to add these items.
OK.
Sorry.
What I want to do first is I want to delete these two grocery lists.
So I want to delete those things so you'll notice that one doesn't exist anymore.
OK.
All right so now let's go ahead and do that.
That same store one store one doesn't exist.
But since I'm returning from the function and that's why I needed to return the list from the function
it's when it gets created I need to somehow get a handle on that object back.
So let's go ahead and just add the item as we did before.
Let's go ahead and add this
I'm going to copy paste.
I'm lazy.
OK.
So we have that.
And now what I can do is I can add item again to store one.
Now I don't have to assign it to store one anymore because store one is being mutated so I can just
keep doing that.
Still one is not defined.
Sorry.
What do we want to do here is not pass it in.
OK.
So I apologize.
So we don't want to pass it in.
So it will get created.
And now the second time around still one has been created as a list as a new list from an item and we're
going to use that to append.
OK so now let's see what we have in store.
One and we have our data and our milk.
OK.
Good enough.
Now let's go ahead and do the same thing with our second store.
Now we wanted to store two equals and item.
And we're going to and the python that we want to purchase.
But again I'm not going to specify the list so this will start a new list.
OK.
And so now we've added our Python to store number two.
So let's go ahead and see what's in store number two.
And you'll notice we have a problem.
We have the items from store one showing up and still two.
And what about store one what's going on.
We've got the same items.
Well in fact what you have is that store one the memory address of one is the same as the memory address
of still two.
They're both the same lists.
OK.
So what's happening here is let's go back to the function.
Remember when this line of code runs it runs in this case are in the triple A notebook when I it when
I do the shift and turn to execute this cell.
This function is created in a regular Python program.
When you load the module up that contains the function at that point that function will get created
and that is when the default parameter values are evaluated they get evaluated once when the function
is created.
So every time I call this function an item the default list has already been created.
It was created once.
So you get a single object and every time I call an item and even if I don't specify the grocery list
it's going to use the default and that default will be the same no matter when I call add item.
So when I called add items here with nothing for the grocery list it used the default object which was
some memory address when I called it again without using a list again without passing in the grocery
list.
It went ahead and used the same list object.
So we've got this shirred essentially instance of the grocery list right.
That's always being used when we call add item.
So that's a problem in this case.
We don't want this to happen.
So how do we solve that.
Well it's very simple and it's a standard pattern that we use we use none.
So do not use basically mutable default types in your function definitions unless you actually want
to do that and we'll see an example of where we might want to do something like that and actually leverage
something like that in a few minutes.
So the standard pattern is to do it this way use none for your default values.
Now of course if you're using a non mutable type like an integer and so on it's perfectly fine to set
you know it.
Let's say you want your unit default to be one that's perfectly OK because remember that this is not
we're not going to change the number of units here the problems happening because we're mutating grocery
list since units since one here is not mutable.
It doesn't matter.
OK.
So I'll leave that unit equals one in there.
And so the pattern here is that we're going to say if narks grocery list in other words if grocery list
was not supplied if it is none because non-HD remember we'll evaluate to false to the truth value of
None is false.
So if not grocery list then we start a new grocery list
so we can do that.
And now this will work because remember this code will run every time the function is called.
So every time the function is called without passing in the grocery list it will then execute this.
And of course this is a different function scope each time.
This will be a new object every time.
So now if we have this we can now do the same thing that we did before.
So I'm just going to copy paste.
OK.
And so we have the list for store number one.
Let's go ahead and print that out.
We have that and then we have also the list for store number two that we can start creating where we
just do it this way.
And I would love to talk to.
And now we can print still too.
And you can see we have a different list.
And in fact store one is still to is false them not the same object.
So that's the way that you can fix this problem.
So be very careful when you use mutable default types in function parameters.
It can really cause problems because you're using the same object.
And when it's immutable it doesn't matter because you can't change the contents of that object.
But when you're working with a mutable type it does matter right.
As we saw in this example here OK let's take a look now at an example where we might actually want to
leverage something like this.
So let's go ahead and let's do a very simple factorial function
and we're going to use a recursive definition for red soil and there's less than one we're going to
return one else we're going to print Calcott.
The fact that we're calculating
and factorial so we'll print that and then we'll return and times factorial of and minus one.
OK so that's a very very simple approach to calculating a factorial using a recursive approach of the
most effective.
But it works.
OK.
So now how do we call it.
Well we just call it like let's say this way.
Factorial 3.
And you'll notice that it's calculating three factorial.
But in order to calculate three factors it also has to calculate two factorial.
But in order to calculate two factorial it has to calculate one factorial and then one just returns
one.
So you can see that you calculate three factorial.
We had to calculate three factorial to factor and one factor all.
And finally we got our answer of 6.
So great.
Now let's run that again with the same number.
And you'll notice that it had to calculate again three factorial to factor a 1 factorial.
So in other words it had to redo those calculations once more.
So now let's go ahead and do it a different way.
Let's say that we want to cache those results.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to define another function factorial.
I'm going to redefine this and I'm going to make a for starters.
I'm going to do it this way.
I'm going to make a keyword only parameter.
I'm going to make it mandatory and that's going to be a dictionary.
So in other words we're going to have to create outside of the functionality and how to tell how user
when you use the factorial function you have to create a cache variable which is going to be an empty
dictionary and you need to pass it to us every time you use it.
So that's probably not very user friendly.
So we'll want to fix that up.
But for now I just want to put it outside and let's see how we would do it this way.
So the factorial now takes this mandatory cache dictionary and we have to make a few tweaks to this.
So we're going to say if any is less than one written one otherwise we have to calculate the factorial.
But what we're going to do is first check to see if that any value that key is in our cash if it is
we're just going to return the value out of the cash that we've stored associated with that key.
So we're going to say if and then cash return cash and if it's not then we're going to have to calculate
the factorial.
So let's go ahead and calculate the factorial.
Now of course it's not in the cash.
So we want it added to the cash.
So now we're going to say cash n equals results.
Okay.
Now the only other difference to here is that factorial requires cash.
So we need to pass it the cash.
Now in this case I made cash a keyword only parameter.
So I'm going to have to pass that as a keyword parameter keyword arguments.
So there we have cash equals cash.
And then finally we can now return our results.
So here we have our factorial function.
But what it means is in order to call it we have to first create the cash over here will be delivered
from here because we actually don't need it to be defined to define the factorial function.
But before we call it we have to define that empty dictionary.
Our cash basically.
And now we can call factorial so that we can save vectorial 3.
Now we have to specify that cash.
Okay.
And then we have calculating 3 factorial to factor a 1 factorial.
Let's go ahead and run this again.
Now what's in the cash by the way we can print cash and you can see that we have 1 is 1 2 is 2 and 3
6.
So those items have been castrates prefectural has been cash.
So if I call factorial of 3 again you'll notice that we don't get any other calculations.
None of these lines of code were run OK.
We ended up hitting the cash every time.
Now if we want to do cash full factorial what's going to happen.
Well four is not in the cash.
So it's going to get calculated but the remaining ones like 3 factorial which is needed to calculate
for factorial wasn't called.
Right.
We got that those results directly out of the cash and so on.
So this is a really interesting technique and we'll come back to this in more detail when we look at
closures and we'll see a better approach to this really.
But this is at this point we can still fix this up quite a bit.
This isn't very user friendly.
Every time we have to remember to pass you know the cash and we've got to tell the user before you can
call the factorial function you need to procreate or cash dictionary that you have to pass in every
time.
That's kind of a pain.
It's not very good code.
It's not easy to read.
It's a pain.
So let's fix that up by using this caveat that we just saw.
So I'm not going to make this a key word on the parameter.
In fact I'm going to make it an optional parameter and I'm going to define the cache as a default value
of an empty dictionary.
For now look what happens if I don't pass the cash in.
It will create that one.
And every time I call the factorial function it's code you use the same dictionary just as we saw with
the grocery list that was using the same default grocery list here.
We're going to use the same default dictionary to mutable type.
We're going to modify that default.
So now we don't even have to pass it in here.
We're just going to say factorial and minus one K and we're done with just fix this up.
So now let's give it a try.
Let's see.
Factorial 3.
You'll notice we recalculated three factor all factor of one factor.
Well sure.
The cash is empty.
We have to make all those calculations.
But if we get a call that again vectorial 3 you'll notice that we just get the result six back.
That was a cash hit right.
This line of code then execute.
We never got into the statement.
We hit the cash value instead.
And the same thing occurs if we try and factorial fourth.
You'll notice that we calculate four factorial but none of the other remaining ones in the recursion
are calls.
So this is an example of how you can actually use to your advantage what's going on with the mutable
default parameters.
But be very careful with it.
The other thing that I don't particularly like about this approach it's that it's a little harder to
understand than what we'll see when we do the memorization using decorators.
And also by using decorators and closures we get something that will be all reusable.
Here we kind of have coding our cash into our function.
There's a better approach to this and we'll see that.
But certainly this technique works it's called memoization and we're caching these values and it certainly
works and it can be very helpful.
There just are better ways of doing it.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see in the next video.